

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 106 =====
PART III: COMPLETE ELECTIONS 
On Elections 
Sahl bin Bishr 
[For whom we should elect] 
(§1) All are agreed that elections are weak, except [those] for kings. For 
these people (even should their elections be weakened) have a root—that is, 
their nativities—which strengthen every weak planet in the course.1 (§2) But 
you should not elect anything for the low-class and for merchants and for 
those who follow [in social status], unless [it is based] upon their nativities, 
and the revolutions of those years, and on the nativities of their children. 
(§3a) However,2 [for] those of whom these things are not known,3 ques- 
tions should be taken for them, and the effecting of their matter may be 
known from those—afterwards it should be elected for them according to 
this.4 (§3b) Because if someone asked you about himself, it has already ar- 
rived at the good or evil from out of his own nativity (that is, in the hour in 
which someone comes to you), because it is he who has asked5 you. 
(§3c) And if it is one whose quaesited matter will not come to be, or if 
the man who asks you (or who goes away to war) will die, beware therefore 
this kind of election.4 (§4) For how would you elect for him whose root is 
1 That is, even a bad election will be able to take advantage of a strong nativity, and even 
put weak natal planets in such a strong nativity to good use. 
2 In this paragraph, Sahl is making the following argument. Normally, we prefer to use a 
client's nativity as the root, because it shows the general promise of success or failure in 
the action he wants to undertake. But if we lack such a nativity, we may substitute the 
chart of a question as to whether or not it will be successful: because a successful question 
chart indirectly affirms that the action is not contrary to his nativity. So, the nativity is the 
preferred root, and a valid, successful question chart is a second-best root. Actually, the 
Latin is a bit clearer than the Arabic here (at least, in Crofts's own translation): the Arabic 
in this sentence suggests that one should not even bother electing for someone who needs 
to ask a question, even though in §5a below Sahl expressly allows elections based on ques- 
tion charts. 
3 That is, if someone did not know his own nativity. 
4 That is, for people whose nativity is not known, we can cast a horary chart as a substi- 
tute for the nativity. 
5 Reading quia ipse est qui te intemgavit, omitting the extra et est. 
6 That is, if the querent has no known nativity, and the horary question shows bad results, 
consider the matter dosed and do not proceed to an election. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 107 =====
92 Choices &lNCEPnoNS III: Complete Elections 
destroyed, especially if in addition the first beginning and the old root on 
which one relies, is [also destroyed]?7 
(§5a) Therefore, beware of electing for him whose root of the nativity or 
question signified something horrible. (§5b) [For] if it came to this,8 [even] if 
you put all the fortunes in stakes,9 and made the bad ones and every planet 
which did not agree with the lord of his Ascendant be cadent,10 it would not 
profit the man anything, (§5c) and especially for those who are low- and 
middle-class: because you do not know whether you might elect an Ascend- 
ant or star which is inimical to him in the root, or there were a bad one in 
that same ascending sign which you have elected for him. 
[The importance of the root] 
(§6a) In fact, this is to be warned against11 for those who sail by sea, or for 
those who go on a foreign journey in one hour (whose intention is on [just] 
one foreign journey): but certain ones of them suffer shipwreck, indeed cer- 
tain ones escape it, and certain ones of them discover assets (but certain 
ones discover nothing). For the condition12 of certain ones cannot be likened 
to the conditions of others of them. (§6b) And I13 have already tested this 
many times in the gathering together of certain people who went out from a 
place in one hour, and they arrived at another region at one hour: but certain 
7 The Latin text reads as though we are still speaking about a low-class client who has a 
bad nativity (the first or ancient root), and the substitute root (the question) is also bad or 
"destroyed." But in the more succinct Crofts version, it is unclear what chart is being 
referred to as the root the nativity or the question. Either way, the point is taken. 
8 That is, if you were somehow coerced into crafting an election for such a person. 
9 Ar. tvatad (sing.), also meaning "tent poles" or something stuck into the ground. In Latin 
this is the usual "angles" (lit, "corners," Lat. anguli), but since the Arabic is available for 
this text I have used a better rendering of it. It translates the Greek kentron ("pivot," 
among other words), and refers to the angles. But it is sometimes unclear whether Sahl 
and other Arabic writers are referring to the whole-sign angles from the Ascendant (the 
ascending sign, tenth sign, seventh sign, fourth sign), or the regions of power or stimula- 
tion which follow the axial degrees (e.g., from the degree of the Midheaven to the 
eleventh-house cusp). This is a problem related to house systems, and so points to more 
fundamental problems and issues in understanding ancient and medieval practices. 
10 Reading based on Crofts, for the Latin's more awkward "and made the bad ones be 
cadent from them, nothing will profit him; and every planet which did not agree with the 
lord of his Ascendant would not profit the man anything." 
11 The idea is that if you choose one election for a group of people, some of those people 
will inevitably have a better or worse relation between the election chart and their own 
nativities: therefore they will encounter different things on the journey. 
12 Esse. 
13 This may in fact be Masha'allah: see Introduction. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 108 =====
Sahl bin Bishrj On Elections 93 
ones of them went back more quickly with the best assets, and certain ones 
took it slow in the same place; but certain ones of them perished before 
[they could] return to their own homes. For this happens to them because of 
their nativities and because of their distribution14 in those years themselves. 
(§7) We even see certain people rejoice and drink on a bad day and on a 
day to be feared (namely [a day] of many impediments), and quarrels come 
together and enter upon them on a good and praiseworthy day. (§8) And 
perhaps you will see the significator15 joined to a bad one from a square as- 
pect or the opposition (or it will be with it in one sign), but he will discover 
good in it: this does not happen unless perhaps the bad ones are more agree- 
able to it because they were the first lord of the Ascendant14 or the lord of 
its distribution, or the lord of the Ascendant of the revolution of the year. 
(§9) If however you elected [based] on the Ascendant of a question or a 
nativity which you knew, or on the lord of the Ascendant (that is, the sign of 
the profection of the year), your election will be more worthy, because you 
would know what (of the stars) is in accord with it,17 and what his Ascendant 
would be. Therefore be careful in this chapter, and let your work18 be like 
your election. 
[More on the theory of elections: natures and henefics/malefics] 
(§10a) And know that the All-powerful and Highest has created every 
creature (namely the world and whatever there is in it) out of the four na- 
tures—that is, out of the four elements—and19 He put the earth in place and 
14 That is, the direction of points through the bounds of the natal charts, indication time- 
lord periods. I am not sure whether Sahl is referring to the distribution/direction of the 
natal longevity releaser, or of the Ascendant, or what. But the point is that if the natal 
predictive methods already indicate good or bad for that specific time in an individual's 
life, it is likely to override a very general election made for an entire group. 
15 This may refer to the Moon, who is sometimes simply referred to as "the significator" 
or "the indicator" in texts on questions (see throughout Judges). 
16 Reading singular with the Arabic (here and in the rest of the sentence). In this first 
phrase, Sahl probably means the lord of the Ascendant in the nativity, just as he has re- 
ferred to the nativity as the "first beginning" and the "old root" in §4 above. 
17 Reading «' for eis (with Arabic). 
18 Crofts's Arabic reads this as "action," so it could mean that the client's deed should be 
carefully undertaken just as the election is carefully chosen. 
19 The Ar. is subtlely different for the rest of this: "And He joined the earth and her ra- 
tional and irrational, movable and immovable beings to the heavens, and placed between 
them insensible things, of which the learned men are cognizant...". 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 109 =====
94 Choices & Inceptions III; Complete Elecitons 
every thing which is above it (of what is rational and irrational, and of what 
is movable and immovable) in a circle; and between this and the circle He put 
subtle things which the wise know, (§10b) like that subtle circumstance20 
which He put between the stone of a magnet and iron, and the one that is 
between a father and a son, and between the one eating and food. Know this 
and understand it. 
(§11 a) Therefore from the concord which is between each of the two es- 
sences (namely the superior and the inferior), matters are combined properly; 
and they are destroyed by adversity.21 And the fortunes are balanced22 (that is, 
of a temperate nature), but the bad ones of a harmful nature (and therefore 
they wish to impede);23 (§llb) but if they were received,24 their [malefic] es- 
sence will not wholly be absent, [nor] the malevolence of their imbalance;25 
and they are like thieves, and, of men, the citizens of evils, and from them 
comes adversity and discord, alteration also and the confusion of matters. 
Understand all of this. 
(§12a) The Ascendant and whatever is in it concerning elections26 
[QuadmplicitiesJ11 
On28 the knowledge of the natures of the signs. The first of them are the 
movable signs. Know that the movable signs signify the mobility of matters, 
quickly [so], and there is nothing lasting in them, nor is their time prolonged. 
20 Occasio. This word really means "occasion" or "pretext," ie., the circumstance that al- 
lows something to happen. Crofts says "relation," which is easier to understand; but 
perhaps the Latin translator chose this word judiciously; instead of merely positing a rela- 
tion, he wanted to emphasize that this relation is the precondition for there to be interaction 
between the parts of the cosmos. 
21 Crofts reads: "when there is harmony between the two essences, the higher and the low- 
er, things are balanced, and when there is disharmony, they are upset" (emphasis mine). 
22 Aequales. 
23 Cf. Sahl's Fifty Judgments #2 and 32, or Tel. 1.5: the malefic planets are harmful because 
they are more extreme in their natures. 
24 Following Crofts (for reciperini). 
25 Reading with Crofts for "cunning of hostility." Cf. Fifty Judgments #25. 
24 This heading must have been added by a later editor or translator. The section title in 
Crofts is actually the first sentence below (rendered in Crofts as: "The science of the na- 
tures of the signs"). 
27 For this subsection on the quadruplicities, cf. Carmen V.3-4. 
28 From here until §20c, cf. al-Rijal VII.3.1. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 110 =====
SAHL BIN BlSHR: ON ELECTIONS 95 
But it is good to sow seed in them, to buy, sell, and to be betrothed to29 a 
woman (all of these are successful under them),30 (§12b) and an infirm per- 
son will be freed quickly; also, a contention will not be prolonged in them, 
and a fugitive will turn back quickly. Even foreign travel is useful in them; 
and if someone promised something in them, what is promised will not 
move forward.31 Pronouncements, dreams, and rumors will be false in them; 
a doctor should not cure under them, nor should any planting be planted 
under them, and a foundation should not be laid down under them, because 
it is bad. (§12c) And everything which you might begin in them (whose sta- 
bility you want), will not be stable; but every unstable work (and hurried 
things) which you wanted to do, begin under them. (§13) And the faster [of] 
the movable ones are Aries and Cancer, for they have more crookedness and 
more mobihty. But Libra and Capricorn are the stronger and more bal- 
anced.32 
29 Firman. 
30 This parenthetical comment belongs to the translator or a later editor. 
31 That is, it will not be successful or work out (prvfiaet). The Ar. says the promise will not 
be kept. 
32 Here and below, we must take each of the signs in context of their ascensional times. 
The crooked signs have the shortest ascensions and so pass by the Ascendant faster; the 
straight signs have the longest and ascend more slowly. In the northern hemisphere, Pi- 
sces and Aries have the same, shortest ascensional time, and the times get longer as we 
fan out in each direction: Aquarius and Taurus have the same time, a bit longer than Pi- 
sces-Aries; likewise Capricorn and Gemini have the same time, and so on with Sagittarius- 
Cancer and Scorpio-Leo, until Virgo and Libra have the longest times. In the southern 
hemisphere, Pisces-Aries are the longest and straightest, and Virgo-Libra the shortest and 
most crooked. What Sahl means here is this. Movable signs are presumed to indicate 
quickness, but there is a difference in their actual quickness, based on the ascensional 
times: longer ascensional times will even out and balance the quickness of a movable sign. 
So, of the movable signs, Aries is the fastest crooked one. Cancer the fastest straight one 
(so that it is more like a crooked one); but Libra is the longest straight one, and Capricorn 
the longest crooked one, so their longer ascensional times balances out their movable 
qualities. But Sahl might also have the domicile rulerships in mind (as he seems to with 
the fixed signs below). 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 111 =====
96 Choices & Inceptions ill: Complete Eleciions 
/ 
w w 
Straight \ Q 
(northern latitudes) \ n Crooked 
(northern latitudes) 
Straight 
(southern latitudes) 
Crooked / 
(southern latitudes)/ 'm 
n C-? 
Figure 11: Straight and crooked signs, 
in northern and southern hemispheres 
(§14a) Next, the fixed ones are appropriate to every work whose stability 
and prolongation is sought, and what its author wants to be lasting (§14b) 
And it is good and useful to build in them, and to celebrate a wedding—after 
the engagement was in the movable ones.33 And if a woman were divorced 
by her husband in them, she will not return to him But for judgments and 
inceptions34 in them, there will not be confidence afterwards, unless the tes- 
timonies of the fortunes would be multiplied in them35 (§14c) And he who 
was conquered34 in them, his imprisonment will be prolonged; and he who 
grows angry in them, will not be able to be appeased quickly.37 But contracts 
33 That is, we want the engagement to be quick (movable signs) but the celebration after 
the marriage to last (fixed signs). 
34 That is, questions and elections. 
35 For this last point Crofts reads, "There is no satisfaction after making a judgment or 
starting an enterprise, unless the testimonies of the benefics are manifold." The idea 
seems to be for most actions, we want quick results, so one must be careful in using the 
fixed signs. 
34 Reading victm for vinctus. 
37 Crofts says the reverse: that he with whom one is angry, cannot be controlled. Perhaps this 
refers to elections in which we want to provoke an emotional response, such as §§129a-c 
below. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 112 =====
Sahl bin Bishr: On Elections 97 
and claims38 in them will be useful, and it will be good to build and lay foun- 
dations. (§15) But Scorpio is lighter than all the fixed [signs], and Leo more 
fixed; Aquarius is slower and worse, but Taurus is more even.39 
(§16a) The common signs are useful in partnerships and brotherhood, 
and whatever might be worked in them often will be repeated. But to buy 
and to celebrate a wedding in them will not be useful nor advantageous, and 
there will be trickery40 and deception in them; and he who is charged of 
something in them, will escape and be relieved of that which is charged 
against him (§16b) And he who is imprisoned in them will not be fixed in 
place (except in Pisces,41 on account of the rarity of its appearance and 
emergence). And he who goes out from prison, returns to that place; and he 
who is taken as a fugitive in them, returns a second time to his flight; and he 
who goes off to a judge in them, neither an opinion nor judgment is setded 
for him.42 (§16c) Nor [should] someone go away on a ship in them, for he 
who goes will be changed from one [ship] to another. To whom something is 
promised in them, it will be dissolved and something of it will not be com- 
pleted for him; and an infirm person will be healed in them, then will incur a 
relapse [of the infirmity]. (§17) Therefore, all of the good and evil which 
comes to a man in them is doubled upon him; and if someone dies in them, 
then after him another person near him43 will die in that place. And altera- 
tion,44 and the washing of the head and the beard, and the purification of 
38 Reading with Crofts for mercedes ("wages, rents"). 
39 Here Sahl is using domicile rulerships to help distinguish the fixed signs, as he does in 
On Times (in which the domiciles of superior planets represent more time than those of 
inferior planets). For example, since Aquarius and Taurus have the same ascensional limes 
(and likewise Scorpio-Leo), we need a different way of distinguishing them. Aquarius is 
already fixed, so being ruled by Saturn makes it even more fixed; Venus as the lord of 
Taurus will loosen it up quite a bit; Scorpio and Leo are somewhere in the middle, but it 
seems that the rulership of Mars makes Scorpio more mobile than Leo. Really, the scheme 
doesn't make sense. Taurus should be fastest because it is crooked and ruled by an inferi- 
or; then perhaps Leo (straight, ruled by Sun), then Scorpio (straight, but ruled by more 
superior Mars), then Aquarius (crooked, but ruled by most superior Saturn). 
40 Ingenium. This is a broad word that often refers to mental skills and character in general; 
but the Arabic Sahl means this in the sense of clever Itickery. 
41 Substituting with al-Rijal VII.3.2, for "except through his own fear." Crofts's Arabic 
lacks this statement, but does not make sense without it. Sahl means that (in the northern 
hemisphere, at least), Pisces has the shortest ascensional time of all the common signs, so 
it passes across the horizon very quickly. 
42 Crofts says he "will not receive a firm decision or judgment." 
43 In proximo', following Crofts, signifying a neighbor or someone related, hence the evil is 
doubled in relation to the first dead person. 
44 According to Crofts, this is resettling one's home from one place to another. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 113 =====
98 Choices & Inceptions III: Complete Elections 
gold and silver are appropriate in them, and sending boys [to learn their] let- 
ters. 
[General advice on elections] 
(§18) If45 however you wish to begin something of those things which I 
told you, then put the Moon and the Ascendant in those houses46 agreeing 
with that which you want, and conjoin the Moon with the fortunes receiving 
[her] in that sign And the signs of the day are stronger in an operation of 
the day; and make the Ascendant diurnal [and put the Moon in diurnal 
signs].47 
(§19a) The airy48 signs are in conformity with hunting by land and sea; 
and the royal signs are in conformity with kings; and the signs which have 
voices are in conformity with him who plays the pipes and little songs;49 and 
the fiery signs are in conformity with everything which is with fire; (§19b) 
and the signs of equality (in which day and night are made equal)50 are in 
conformity with truth and speaking truthfully and with him who works with 
scales; and the changeable signs51 (and they are those in which night and day 
begin to be changed) are in conformity with change and with him who wants 
an alteration from thing to thing. 
(§20) And consider,52 for every work which you want to begin, what is the 
nature of that sign from the orbs;53 and conjoin the Moon and the lord of 
the Ascendant with that essence; and the root54 of that nature and its virtue 
is in the hour of the undertaking. (§21a) Which if you want that which is 
45 Cf. Carmen V.4.5. 
46 Reading et ascendens in illas domos with Crofts, for in ascendente illarum domotnm. 
47 Adding with Crofts. Carmen adds that we should put the Moon and the Ascendant in 
nocturnal signs for nocturnal elections. 
48 Crofts reads "watery," but al-Rijal VII.3 and normal astrological logic suggest the airy 
signs. 
49 Omitting cum crudo et rod alhool. This phrase has something to do with playing or singing 
crudely, but it does not match the Arabic (and seems incomplete), and the Arabized word 
alhool does not correspond to anything in the Arabic. Crofts says, "for those who play the 
nay and for lute-playing and singing." 
50 The equinoctial signs, Aries and Libra. 
51 The tropical signs of Cancer and Capricorn. 
52 Cf. Carmen V.30. 
53 That is, of the circles of heaven: see al-Rijal VII.3. 
54 Crofts reads, "and with the root and strength of that nature...". Both the Latin and 
Arabic readings make the instructions repetitive. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 114 =====
Sahlbin BlSHR: ONEl£CnOXS 99 
connected with55 lords and princes and great men, and those put over cities, 
and visible people,56 and the masters of fights and wealth,57 then it is for you 
[to work] through the Sun; (§21b) and what is connected to lofty people, 
then it is for you [to work] through Jupiter; and that of farmers and the low- 
est people, then it is for you [to work] through Saturn; and that of generals 
and the masters of fights, then it is for you [to work] through Mars; and what 
is connected to women, then it is for you [to work] through Venus. (§21c) 
But58 purchases, and sales, and contentions, and matters of writing, and 
businessmen, are for Mercury; and, of women, in the commingling with 
queens and the inquiry into those things which are among them, through the 
Moon. 
[Impediments of the Moon] 
(§22a) Therefore, if you wished to begin some work, adapt the Ascendant 
and its lord, and the Moon and the lord of the matter.59 And in the begin- 
ning of works, beware of the impediment of the Moon, just as Dorotheus4* 
(and the rest of the sages) said—and there are ten ways: 
(§22b) The first way61 is that she is burned up under the Sun by 12°, 
and likewise after him (but it is easier after him).62 
The second, that she is in the degree of her own descension. 
55 Expatie. I have followed Crofts's translation. One should take this to mean elections on 
behalf of such people's actions, or matters merely concerned with them: e.g., one should 
strengthen the Sun both if a prince is the one undertaking the action, and if he is a lowly 
person going to see the prince. 
56 Spectabilium, lit. "people who can be looked at." In other words, celebrities of every sort. 
57 Pugnae et largomm. Crofts reads "executioners and amnesty," and says the Latin is a mis- 
translation. Executions and amnesty pertain to public justice. 
58 Omitting the following redundant passage: "And that of buying, and selling, and ex- 
changes, and the matters of writers and businessmen, then it is for you [to work] through 
Mercury. In the mixing with mistresses (of women) and an inquiry into what is connected 
to them, it is for you [to work] through the Moon." 
59 One should probably also make the lord of the Moon fit, as al-Rijal reads in this place 
(VII.3.4): cf. Carmen\5.2\. 
60 Cf. Carmen V.5.3-9, and compare to Sahl's Introduct. §5.16, as well as TTA IV.5 and Search 
1.5. 
61 Cf. Catmen V.5.3-4. 
62 That is, after she has passed him and he is behind her. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 115 =====
100 Choices & Inceptions III: Complete Elections 
The third,63 that she is in the opposition of the Sun. 
(§22c) The fourth,64 that she is joined to bad ones, or in the light of 
their square aspect or the opposition. 
The fifth,65 that she is with the Head or the Tail, from a degree to 12° 
(which is the boundary of an eclipse). 
The sixth,66 that she is in the last degrees67 of the signs (which are the 
bounds of the bad ones). 
(§22d) The seventh,68 that she is cadent from the stakes, or in the burnt 
path (which is the end of Libra and the beginning of Scorpio)—and 
this59 is the worst that there is of the impediments of the Moon, and 
especially if it were the inception of a marriage or something concern- 
ing the matters of women, or buying, or selling, or foreign travel. 
(§22e) The eighth, that she is in the twelfth sign70 from her own house 
(that is, in Gemini), with a bad one, or were she in the opposition of 
her own house, or absent from it.71 
(§22f) The ninth,72 that the Moon is slower in course: and this is what 
the sages call a similarity to the course of Saturn, so long as her course 
63 Cf. Carmen V.5.5. 
m Cf. Carmen V.5.29. 
45 Cf. Carmen V.5.5. 
66 Cf Carmen V.5.8. 
67 Reading graitibus for gradus. 
68 Cf Carmen V,5.8. 
69 I do not know whether both of these count as the worst, or just one of them (and if so, 
which one). 
70 The Arabic has "in a twelfth-part with a malefic." But that suggests a bodily conjunc- 
tion by sign or degree, which was already described above. The Latin al-Rijal (VII.3.4) 
suggests that the sign represented by the Moon's twelfth-part has a malefic on it, which is 
precisely the sort of thing described by Paul of Alexandria (Ch. 22, and the Olympiodorus 
commentary with examples). Then, CarmenY.S.S has the Moon being in the sign indicated 
by a malefic's twelfth-part, also the type of thing described by Paul. I suggest that we 
should use the twelfth-part interpretation or Paul or al-Rijal, not the "twelfth sign" of the 
Latin. 
71 That is, in aversion to Cancer (as Crofts explains, and also al-Rijal in his VII.3.4). 
72 Carmeny.5.6. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 116 =====
SAIIL BIN BlSHR: ON ELECTIONS 101 
in a day is less than 12°, and [even] if it was one minute less (this is if 
her course in the day were less than her average course in one day), 
which is written in the Canon, that is, in the Book of Courses?1 
(§22g) The tenth, which Masha'allah and the sages of our time have 
said: this is if the Moon were empty in [her] course. 
[More general advice] 
(§23a) And make the Moon fit, according to your ability; and you should 
not put her waxing in any Ascendant, because this is to be feared on account 
of what happens to [the election's] owner74 because of infirmities in the 
body, unless the lord of the Ascendant or a fortune75 are aspecting the as- 
cending [degree]:74 (§23b) because a planet which does not aspect its own 
house is like a man absent from his own home, who cannot repel nor prohib- 
it anything from it. (§23c) But if a planet did aspect its own house, it is like 
the owner of a home who guards it: for whoever is in the home, fears him, 
and he who is outside fears to come to it.77 (§24) And if the lord of the As- 
cendant were a bad one, make him aspect78 from a Icine or sextile aspect. 
73 The Arabic does not add this statement about a Book oj Courses (which must be a book 
of tables and ephemerides like the Zij), but gives a description in terms of kardqjas-. "when 
your calculation for the moon is in the first kardaja of its kardajas, so that the kardaja is 
from one to fifteen degrees." According to Crofts (p. 157) and Sarton (pp. 420-22), a 
kardaja originally the sine value of 1/96 of the circle (or 3° 45'), equivalent to 1/24 of 
90° (a quarter of a circle), namely .0654. But later, it was thought to derive from 1/24 of 
the whole circle, equivalent to 15°. So, Sahl is assuming this later view, which not all au- 
thors used even in later time. At any rate, I do not really understand what Sahl means by 
this. 
74 I.e., the one undertaking the action. 
75 Crofts reads, "and the lord of the house of the moon." But notice that the Latin nicely 
parallels the use of the malefics in §24. 
76 Crofts herself has added jgradum] because the Latin reads ascendentem (implying a mascu- 
line subject) as opposed to its usual ascendens. But the Arabic itself does not specify the 
degree, implying only a whole-sign aspect. Crofts helpfully notes (p. 158) that if the Moon 
is in the Ascendant and the lord of the Ascendant aspects the Ascendant, then both the 
Moon and the Ascendant will have their lords/dispositors aspecting them, which is often 
recommended by Sahl. 
77 In this context, it suggests that the lord of the Ascendant can check the tendency of the 
Moon to create infirmities while she is in the Ascendant. 
78 Crofts states in a footnote and annotation (pp. 102, 158) that the malefic is supposed to 
aspect the Moon or the Ascendant, but I do not see where she gets the Moon from. To me 
it seems that only the Ascendant is pertinent here. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 117 =====
102 Choices <& Incefhons III; Complete Elhctions 
And beware lest you put the lord79 of the Ascendant or the Moon (if there 
were bad ones aspecting the Moon) in a stake, and that you do not put them 
in the stakes of the Ascendant.80 
(§25a) Nor81 should you make the Lot of Fortune, in all beginnings or 
questions, be cadent from the aspect of the Moon or her conjunction; and 
you should not look at the lord of the Lot of Fortune, nor should you care if 
the Lot is cadent from the Ascendant, if the Lot aspected the Ascendant and 
the Moon. (§25b) And strive to put the lord of the Ascendant with the Lot, 
because this is more useful and of greater profit. And you should never put 
the Moon in the second, or the sixth, or the eighth, or the twelfth from the 
Lot, because this is horrible.82 
(§26) And83 always set up the Ascendant and the Moon, in all beginnings, 
in signs of straight ascension, because they signify ease and progress; and 
you should not put them in signs of crooked ascension, because they signify 
complication or hardship and slowness. 
Also, the Ascendant and the fourth [sign] from it84 signify what happens 
to that election. 
(§27) Therefore, look at the fortunes and the bad ones from the places, 
both the strong and the weak,85 and speak about the beginning of that matter 
and its end, from that strength and weakness. 
(§28) And Dorotheus said,86 if you saw the Moon impeded, and a matter 
is at hand which ought to come to be wholly and it cannot be put off, you 
should not give the Moon a role in the Ascendant: and make her be cadent 
from the Ascendant, and put a fortune in the Ascendant, and strengthen the 
Ascendant and its lord. 
791 take this to mean a malefic lord of the Ascendant. Crofts gives the following "if there 
are two malefics in aspect with the moon from an angle, place it from the angles of the 
ascendant." 
80 The Arabic is vaguer and unclear about what we are supposed to do or not do: "beware 
of placing the lord of the ascendant or the moon, if there are two malefics in aspect with 
the moon from the stake, place it from the stakes of the ascendant." 
81 The first part of this paragraph bears a resemblance to the later Forty Chapters §241. 
82 Cf. Carmen 1.5.3-5. 
83 Cf- Carmen V.2.2-5. But Carmen says the opposite: signs of direct ascension show diffi- 
culty and slowness, those of crooked ascension will be faster. 
84 The Arabic adds the lord of the fourth sign, as well. 
85 I take this to refer to the strong and weak places, not planets that are otherwise made 
strong or weak by other considerations. 
86 Crofts (p. xi] says that this is based on Carmen V.5.10-11. See my Introduction for a 
discussion of this passage. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 118 =====
Sahl bin Bishu- On Elections 103 
(§29a) The second sign from the Ascendant, 
and whatever is in it, in terms of elections 
[Borrowing and lending! 
If87 you wished to choose the hour for the lending88 of money, let the 
Moon be in Leo or in Pisces, or in Scorpio or Sagittarius, or in Aquarius, and 
let her be defective in light, and let both fortunes be deficient89 and aspecting 
the Moon or Ascendant. (§29b) And90 let Mercury be cleansed of Mars, and 
[let] the Moon be with Jupiter or Mercury; and beware lest the Moon be im- 
peded by any one of the bad ones; nor let Mercury be joined to them [by 
bodily conjunction] or in their square aspect; nor let the fortunes be cadenf. 
(§29c) because if the Moon were with Mars, he will fall into labor, and worry, 
and [bad] business dealings, and harshness or contention. And if she were 
impeded by Saturn, he will fall into something prolonged, and delay, and he 
will get out of it after distress and fatigue. 
(§30a) If91 however you wished to conceal the lending, so that no one 
would be able to perceive it, let the Moon (while you take it or seek it) be 
under the rays, going toward the conjunction of the fortunes after her sepa- 
ration from the Sun: for this is easier for the owner [of the election], and 
more concealed, and it will not be made public. (§30b) For if the Moon were 
in her exit out of being burned up, going out toward the conjunction of 
Mars, this will be made public and it will fall into the mouths of men, and in 
the mouths of those whom you do not want that they should know it (§30c) 
And beware lest the Moon be in the circle of the signs (without latitude, that 
is, in the Head or Tail)92 or in the burnt path, because this is horrible. 
(§31) And Dorotheus said,93 you should not take what is loaned, nor 
should you loan something to someone, while the Moon is in the first degree 
of Leo or Gemini or Sagittarius, or [if] these signs94 were ascending: because 
this is hateful for a loan especially. (Know this.) 
87 For this election, cf. Carmen V.20. 
88 Omitting "taking and," with Crofts: borrowing is described below. 
89 Carmen V.20.7 has the Moon deficient, but does not make the benefics so. 
90 Through the rest of this paragraph, cf. Carmen V.20.2-4. 
91 For this sentence, cf. Carmen V.20.5. 
92 This parenthetical remark is by the Latin translator. 
93 See Carmen V.20.6. 
94 Carmen does not fault the entire sign, but only the degrees mentioned. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 119 =====
104 Choices ei- Inceptions III: Compline Elechons 
[Business partnerships] 
(§32a) And95 if you wished to partner with someone in assets or in a 
work, it is better for this that the Moon be cleansed of the bad ones and 
joined to fortunes, and that she be in common signs (so that it would be mul- 
tiplied),96 or the Moon should be in Leo or in Taurus. (§32b) And it is to be 
abhorred in these things that the Moon should be in the lower signs97 (and 
worse than the rest is Libra because the burnt path is in it; likewise abhorred 
is Aquarius). (§33) And let the Moon be received from a trine or sextile as- 
pect, so that [the partners'] separation is good: because in the square aspect 
and the opposition there will be words between them (that is, a quarrel in the 
separation). Also, an aspect of esteem signifies the goodness or honesty of 
their separation, and their faithfulness and good will. (§34) And beware of 
the presence of the bad ones in the stakes, because the Ascendant belongs to 
the one of them beginning the partnership, or him who is of lesser age;98 but 
the seventh [sign] belongs to the other partner; and the tenth [sign] signifies 
what will be between them, and the multitude or scarcity of wealth; but from 
the fourth is known the conclusion of their matter. (§35) And beware lest the 
lord of the Ascendant does not aspect the Ascendant, or that the lord of the 
house of the Moon does not aspect the Moon: because if it were so, one of 
them99 will delude his partner, and their matter will be made worse in the 
separation. 
[Investing moneyfor profit] 
(§36) And if you wished to send forth [your] assets,100 seeking its wealth, 
adapt the Moon and Mercury, and the lord of the house of assets, not to 
95 Cf. Carmen V.19.1-14, which lists each sign individually, but Sahl has tried to shorten 
things and makes a few changes. Sahl omits Aries, which Carmen says is bad; he makes 
Taurus good, which Carmen says is bad; he makes Capricorn bad, which Carmen says is 
good; and Sahl makes it ambiguous as to whether Pisces is good or bad—Carmen says it is 
good. 
96 That is, so the experience is repeated, for ongoing profit and cooperation. 
97 That is, the signs of southern declination. 
98 As though the querent is a junior or inexperienced apprentice seeking to partner with a 
master. 
99 Crofts says "both." 
100 Mittere, a fair translation of the Arabic "channel." The text refers to investing your 
money in some activity in order to make a profit. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 120 =====
Sahl bin Bishr: On Eibciions 105 
mention the lord of the degree of the house of trust.101 (§37a) And let the 
Moon be joined to Mercury, and make Mars be cadent from each of them 
just as you are able; also make Mercury fit and purge him of defects. (§37b) 
If however Mercury were retrograde, adapt the Moon and the degree of the 
house of trust, and make Mercury be cadent from the light of Mars; and you 
should not make [Mercury] be cadent from the aspect of Venus and from the 
lord of the eleventh. (§38) And let your trust (in the channeling102 of assets 
and in the search for wealth) always be in Mercury, and the Moon, and the 
degree of the house of trust, and their lords, and make Mars and his light be 
cadent from [Mercury and the Moon].103 
[Sales and purchases] 
(§39a) And104 if you wished to elect the hour of a purchase, make the Lot 
of Fortune fit, and let it be in the houses of Jupiter, joined to fortunes; be- 
cause this will be better for the one buying than for the one selling. (§39b) 
And the Moon, if she were in signs of straight ascension, increased in light 
and number, and joined to the fortunes, whatever he would buy in that same 
hour, its owner will lose in it:105 for this is better for the one selling than for 
the one buying. (§39c) And let Mars be cadent from the Moon and Mercury, 
because in a sale and purchase Mars impedes, and he is the one who signifies 
labor and contention. (§39d) Likewise the Tail—therefore make it be cadent 
from the Moon especially (and it is below Mars [in malice]).106 
(§40) And if you wished to sell, put the Moon in her own exaltation or 
triplicity, separated from the fortunes and aspecting the bad ones, but do not 
let her be joined to them107 
101 The eleventh. 
102 Following Crofts, for the Lat. dmctione. 
103 Following Crofts, who clarifies this. 
104 For this paragraph, cf. Carmen V.9.1 -7. 
105 By "it," Sahl means what is bought: the new owner will lose money on it, or lose the 
object itself. 
106 Adding the words in brackets, based on al-Rijal VII. 11 on the same topic. 
107 This seems to mean that she should be in a sign-based configuration, not a degree- 
based connection. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 121 =====
106 Choices & Inceptions 111: Complete Elections 
[Alchemical works] 
(§41) And if you wished to perform a work of alchemy, or a work which 
you wished to repeat, let this come to be [with] the Moon in common signs, 
cleansed of the bad ones, and let the Ascendant be likewise—therefore adapt 
it. And if your work were in gold, strengthen the Sun and make him fit in its 
inception.108 
(§42) [The third sign and whatever is in it concerning elections] 
And whatever there is in the third sign concerning elections, a portion of 
it falls109 in the ninth and another portion in the house of friends: we will 
state it then, if God wills. 
(§43) The fourth sign and whatever is in it, in the manner of elections 
[Building a bouse] 
If you wished to elect so that you might build a house, adapt the Moon 
and her lord, the Ascendant and its lord, also the Lot of Fortune and Mercu- 
ry. (§44a) And make Mars be cadent from these significators which I have 
named for you, and you should never give him a role in anything concerning 
the building of houses. (§44b) And if it could not come about but that he 
did have a role, make Venus strong in her own place, and give her strength 
over Mars, and join her to him from a trine or sextile aspect: because Mars 
does not impede a matter of Venus, in view of the greatness of her friend- 
ship toward him (§44c) And make Saturn be cadent from Venus according 
to your ability (on account of his enmity), with Mars and with the Moon, if 
they aspect each other from esteem110 
(§45a) And111 let the Moon be increased in light and number, and joined 
to Jupiter from a square aspect, because this is better than the opposition: 
108 See On Quest. §13.12 for more on alchemy. 
109 Reading the indicative with the Arabic, for ceciderit. 
110 Both the Arabic and the Latin seem to be missing the operative and, so that Saturn 
should be both (a) cadent from Venus and (b) in a good aspect with Mars and the Moon. 
But see also al-Rijal's alternative report from "Nufil" in VII.20.3. 
111 For this paragraph, cf. Carmen V.6. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 122 =====
Sahl bin Bishr: On Elections 107 
and this signifies the beauty of the building and its perfection. (§45b) And 
beware lest the Moon be with Saturn or the Tail, or Saturn be in the Ascend- 
ant or in the fourth; because this signifies slowness and duress in the work, 
and that it will not be erected; (§45c) or if it were erected or were inhabited, 
its inhabitants will not cease to suffer fears in it, and infirmities, and robbers, 
and tribulations from death, and the building will split open, and perhaps it 
will fall down. (§45d) And if Mars aspected [the Moon],112 and it113 was as- 
cending (in the circle of the apogee or the short one),114 burning up and 
falling down will be feared for it; and let the Moon be then increased in light, 
because then it will be useful for its owner. (§46) And let the lord of the 
house of the Moon be aspecting her, likewise let the lord of the Ascendant 
be aspecting the Ascendant (and they should be cleansed of the bad ones); 
because if they did not aspect, its owner will not stay in it. 
[Destmjing a house] 
(§47a) And115 if you wished to destroy a house, let this be when the Moon 
descends in her own circle, and she were separated from the bad ones and 
joined to the fortunes; and let the fortune itself be eastern or ascending di- 
rect, (§47b) or let the Moon be joined to the lord of her own house out of 
esteem (that is, from the trine or sextile aspect), so that its destruction will be 
easier; but in the square aspect and the opposition, its destruction will be 
more difficult. 
[Buying and occupying land] 
(§48) And if you wished to buy lands and to enter into them with some- 
one,11* or you wished to own land so that you might get from someone what 
112 Reading earn for eum, following Crofts. 
113 Crofts uses "it" for all planets, so it is unclear whether the Moon or Mars is meant. But 
it is probably Mars, due to the reference to burning and falling down later in the sentence. 
114 This parenthetical remark is by the Latin translator. Crofts understands this notion of 
"ascending" as simply meaning the left-hand side of the chart, i.e., from the IC to the 
Ascendant, to the MC. 
115 Cf. Carmen V,7. 
116 Crofts reads, "to occupy them with someone." 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 123 =====
108 Choices & Inceptions III: Complete Elections 
it renders,117 let Saturn be in his own exaltation or in his own triplicity or 
bound, and let Jupiter be in his aspect from a stake118 or a trine aspect, and 
make Mars be cadent from them. (§49a) And let the Moon be in the begin- 
ning of [the Lunar] month, aspecting Saturn from esteem, increased in 
number, also in the aspect of Jupiter; this signifies the populating of that 
land and its renderings. (§49b) Which if you were not able to have the aspect 
of Jupiter with Saturn, make it Venus instead of Jupiter, and you will make 
the watery signs fortunate; because if you made them fortunate with the for- 
tunes, they will be better than the airy signs. (§49c) And let the Moon be in 
her own exaltation or in the Midheaven, and the lord of the Ascendant as- 
pecting her; also, let the Moon and the Ascendant be cleansed of the bad 
ones and from defects. 
[Digging: rivers and wells] 
(§50a) And if you wished to divert119 a river or dig a well, let this be when 
Saturn is eastern, and the Moon under the earth in the third or fifth, free 
from the bad ones, made fortunate and received; (§50b) and beware lest there 
be one of the bad ones in the Midheaven: because this is to be feared, lest 
the well tumble down or the river flow off.120 (§50c) And let Saturn be in the 
eleventh from the Ascendant, and the Moon be joined to a fortune in a fixed 
sign, and the fortune itself ascending in the circle.121 (§50d) And the better 
of the fortunes is Jupiter. Which if you were unable to do this, put Jupiter122 
in the Midheaven, because this is more lasting for the river and more stable 
for the well. 
117 This is according to the Latin version, which suggests the rent, either as a portion of 
what is grown on it or as a portion of the proceeds after the crops are sold. Crofts reads, 
"you want to take a land or receive it from someone." 
118 My sense is that this refers to one of the whole-sign angles from Saturn, not from the 
Ascendant. Cf. §61a below. 
119 Deducere. Crofts reads, "make a river flow." 
120 Or, "run dry" (Crofts). 
121 Crofts reads, "let the benefic be joined to the moon in a fixed, ascending sign." 
122 Omitting (fortunas, idest). My reading matches Crofts. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 124 =====
Sahl bin Bishil- On Ejections 109 
[Planting] 
(§51) And if you wished to plant palm trees, or fig trees and the rest of 
trees, let this be when the Moon is in a fixed sign, and the lord of her house 
is aspecting her from the watery signs. (§52a) And let the Ascendant be a 
fixed or common sign, and the lord of the Ascendant [be] ascending and 
eastern.123 (§52b) Because if it were ascending and it were not eastern, they 
will sprout faster but they will make a delay in producing fruit; (§52c) and if 
it were eastern, descending, they will sprout slowly and produce fruit quickly 
(and if it were eastern, ascending, they will sprout quickly and produce fruit 
quickly); (§52d) and if it were western, descending, both [processes] will be 
slow: namely their arising and the fruit. (§53) And let the lord of the Ascend- 
ant and the lord of the house of the Moon be aspecting them,124 and let 
them be free of the bad ones and from burning. 
[Sowingj 
(§54) And if you wished to sow seed (or something [which you never 
want to lose]),125 let the Ascendant be a common sign, and its lord in a mov- 
able sign, aspecting the lord of its own house, and itself124 free from the bad 
ones: because if a bad one aspected it, the seed itself will encounter impedi- 
ment. (§55a) Therefore, let the Moon be increased in light and number, 
because if the Moon were under the rays and defective in number, the seed 
itself vanish and nothing will sprout from it. (§55b) And if it were as I have 
told you before, with the Moon increased in number, the seed will sprout 
thinly, according to the quantity of that which is sown. 
123 It is hard to know which sense of easternness/westemness is meant here. The al- 
Khayyat version quoted in al-Rijal VII.25 specifically mentions latitude ("ascending in its 
latitude"), but al-'Imranrs version of the same chapter (II.5.4) simply says "ascending 
eastern." Certainly the lord of the Ascendant should be outside of the Sun's rays, if not 
actually rising before him. 
124 That is, the lord of the domicile of the Moon aspecting the Moon, and the lord of the 
Ascendant, the Ascendant. 
125 Reading with Crofts for the awkward quod ultra volueris exercere. 
126 That is, the lord of the Ascendant. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 125 =====
11 o Choices & Incefhons III- Compleie Elections 
(§56) The fifth sign and whatever is in it in terms of elections 
[Conceiving a child] 
If you wished to elect the hour of conjoining [sexually], namely so that 
you would generate a male child, let the Ascendant and its lord, and the 
Moon and the lord of the house of children, be in masculine signs or in a 
masculine part of the circle at the hour of conjoining; and you should not 
put any but a masculine planet in the Ascendant of that same hour or in the 
sign of children (§57a) And if you want that it be female, let these significa- 
tors be in feminine signs and in a feminine part of the circle. (§57b) Which if 
you could not do this and these significators were diverse (that is, if certain 
ones of them were in masculine signs, but certain ones in feminine ones), let 
the lord of the hour and the planet receiving the Moon's disposition be part- 
ners with those who had more testimony in the masculine signs and in a 
masculine part of the circle, and the child will be according to this. 
[Miscarriage and abortion] 
(§58a) And127 if there were a dead child in the uterus and you wished to 
take it out, let this be when the Moon is defective in light, descending from 
the [belt toward the south],128 aspecting the fortunes from a trine or square 
aspect with the aspect of Mars. (§58b) And better and more worthy than this 
is if the sign of the Moon and the Ascendant were of the feminine signs 
which are of straight ascension, and not in crooked signs. 
[Educating children] 
(§59a) And if you wished to hand a child over for training, or to send him 
to a place in which he might be taught some profession129 or mathematics,130 
let your election be for this: and let the Moon be aspecting Mercury, and let 
127 Cf. Carmen V.18. 
128 Reading with Carmen V.18.1. Both the Latin and Arabic have her descending from the 
Midheaven toward the seventh, with the Arabic also calling this "descending from the 
belt." But Carmen's text makes it clear this means moving southwards in ecliplical latitude, 
or perhaps even in equatorial declination into the southern signs (i.e., Libra through Pi- 
sces). 
129 That is, a trade skill, 
no Numerum. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 126 =====
Sahl bin Bishk- On Ei^ciions ill 
them be free from the bad ones. (§59b) And let the Ascendant be Gemini or 
Virgo, and let Mercury be eastern, ascending—and do not let him be de- 
scending, nor retrograde, (nor in his own first station),131 nor in his own 
descension, nor let him be impeded—and let the lord of the house of Mer- 
cury be likewise. (§59c) And you should not make the Moon be descending 
and deficient in light, because it makes the training slow down; and let the 
lords of their houses be aspecting them. 
(§60a) The sixth sign and whatever is in it in terms of elections 
[Exorcisms] 
If132 some devil or an infestation of evil inhabitants were in some place or 
house, or some terrible thing which is to be feared had followed him (namely 
the inhabitant), or there were some phantasm appearing, and you wished to 
remove it from its place or from some man by means of a song133 or some 
entreaty134 or trick, (§60b) beware lest the Moon or the Ascendant be in 
some one of these signs: namely in Leo and Cancer, in Scorpio and Aquari- 
us. But let the Moon be in the rest outside of these, separated from the bad 
ones and joined to the fortunes. 
[Taking medicines for bowel and digestion problems] 
(§61a) And135 if you wished to elect for taking medicine for [the bow- 
els],136 that is, those who have [bowel] spasms, or for taking medicine for a 
pain of the belly, or to make a plaster, let this be when the Moon [or] the 
Ascendant is in Libra or in Scorpio (and the Moon in it), joined to the for- 
tunes, and you should not put one of the bad ones in the stakes of the 
131 This phrase is in the critical Latin edition, but not in Crofts. 
132 C(. Carmen V.37. 
133 Or more likely, a spell or incantation, following Crofts. That is, an exorcism. 
134 Reading with Crofts for inquisitione ("search, examination"). 
135 Cf. Carmen V.38.2. Note that §§61a-63 present the first of three schemes for the body: 
§§65a-d present the second, and §§66a-b the third. See also al-Tmrani 1.2.9 for a little 
more discussion of this topic. 
134 Reading with Crofts, for ad eos qui mali fuerint. Carmen includes the management of diar- 
rhea and using enemas. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 127 =====
112 Choices & Inceptions III: Complete Eleciions 
Moon.137 (§61b) Which if it could not happen but that this does take place, 
let this be by a trine or sextile aspect, without the opposition and without the 
projection of the two rays,138 or the entrance under the rays [of the Sun]: 
because if it were so, it will make pain and impediment. 
[Taking medicines affecting different parts of the body] 
(§62a) If139 however you wanted a cure for the head and whatever comes 
down from [out of] it (like gargling and vomiting), let the Ascendant140 and 
the Moon be in Aries or Taurus, [and the Moon] defective in light and joined 
to the fortunes. And beware of the aspect of the Sun from the square aspect 
or the opposition in Aries especially, on account of the heat of the Sun. 
(§62b) But for remedies which are projected into the nostrils (like suffii- 
migations141 and sneezing-powders and so on), let this be when Cancer or 
Leo or Virgo is ascending, and the Moon is joined to the fortunes; and do 
not let her be joined to the bad ones, nor to a retrograde planet, nor to an 
impeded one. 
(§63) And if you wanted a cure for the body (namely the hands and feet), 
let Capricorn or Aquarius or Pisces be ascending, and let the Moon be in 
them, joined to the fortunes. 
[Curing old diseases] 
(§64a) And if you wanted a cure for some old disease, let your election for 
doing this be when the Moon is in her triplicity (and the better one is Taurus, 
because it is of the diseases of the earth).142 And let the Moon be cleansed 
of the bad ones, and let the fortunes be in the stakes of the Moon from Tau- 
rus, and it will be stronger and better. (§64b) [And take care] so that the old 
infirmity goes away and does not return to him who suffers it, and beware 
137 That is, in the Moon's whole-sign angles. 
138 Crofts believes this refers to the orbs of the planets, but that does not make sense to 
me. It probably refers to besieging. 
139 For this paragraph, cf. Carmen V.38.1. 
140 Omitting the redundant Aries. 
141 That is, smoke or other odors inhaled through the nose (as when we inhale eucalyptus 
fumes to clear the sinuses). Crofts reads, "snuff." 
142 I am following Crofts's interpretation here, that Sahl wants either the watery or earthy 
triplicity (since she is a triplicity lord of each), and that the earthy one (of which Taurus is 
a member) is better. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 128 =====
Sahl bin Bishpj On Elections 113 
lest the Moon be joined to Saturn in particular, because it signifies the pro- 
longing of the illness. 
[The Moon in signs and regions indicating limbs] 
(§65a) And Masha'allah said; look, in every cure which you wanted, at the 
place of the infirmity in the body; which if it were in the part of the head or 
throat or chest, cure it when the Moon is in Aries, and Taurus, and Gemini 
(which is the upper part); (§65b) and if it were in the part of the belly and 
lower in the pubic area and the navel, cure it when the Moon is in Cancer 
and Leo and Virgo; and this is the middle part; (§65c) but if the disease were 
in the lower part, namely in the anus and in the lower part of the body, cure 
it when the Moon is in Libra and Scorpio and Sagittarius. And let the Moon 
be joined to the fortunes, increased in light and number. (§65d) And if it 
were a disease from the knees below, up to the feet, cure it when the Moon is 
in Capricorn and Aquarius and Pisces. 
(§66a) And it is even said143 that every pain which is from the head up to 
the navel ought to be cured when the Moon is between the stake of the 
earth, ascending up to the Midheaven, through this ascending part of the 
circle; and this is the place which is called the "upper part of the circle." 
(§66b) And if it were from the navel to the lower part of the feet, you will 
cure him when the Moon is between the tenth, descending to the stake of 
the earth, which is the "lower part of the circle." (§66c) And let there be a 
fortune in the Ascendant; because if it were so, it signifies that he would be 
healed and progress. 
[Eyes, touching with iron, cupping letting blood] 
(§67a) And144 if there were some blister145 in the eye, or some thing, and it 
were necessary that it be touched with iron or scarified, and there were a 
covering146 over it, or it were in some place of the body for which it is neces- 
sary that it be touched by iron (like the cutting of a vein), let this be when the 
143 That is, by Masha'allah (confirmed by al-Rijal VII.44): it must come from his transla- 
tion of Dorotheus (see Carmen V.27.26). 
144 For this set of topics, cf. Canwew V.39-40. For §§67a-c in particular, cf. Carmen V.40.1. 
145 Vesica. Or, a pustule (Crofts) or cyst. 
144 Coopetlorium. Crofts reads "film." This probably refers to cataracts. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 129 =====
114 Choices & Incefiions III: Complete Elbchons 
Moon is increased in light and number, (§67b) unless, however, [it is] in 
drawing away [fluids] by cupping: because then you will make the Moon de- 
fective in light and number, joined to the fortunes. And let Jupiter be above 
the earth in the Ascendant, or the eleventh, or the tenth or ninth;147 and be- 
ware of [the Moon's] conjunction with Mars if the Moon were increased in 
light and number. (§67c) If however you were unable to put Jupiter in these 
places, let him be aspecting the Ascendant. And beware lest the Moon and 
the Ascendant be in the earthy signs, and lest the Nodes148 be commingled 
with Mars (that is, having some communion with Mars); (§67d) and beware 
then, in the Moon's rising [out of the beams]—that is, when the Moon pass- 
es by the Sun through 12°; likewise in the prevention; or that Mars be in the 
Ascendant when [the doctor] cuts this off; and likewise Saturn, unless Saturn 
is in the beginning of the [Lunar] month and the Moon is increased in light 
and number. (§68a) Because if he cut something off from the body, or punc- 
tured it, it will putrefy, and the draining or puncturing will not profit the one 
suffering the infirmity. (§68b) And149 you should not cut a vein nor extract a 
tooth if the Moon were in a movable or common sign, clothed by (that is, 
commingled with) the bad ones, unless the Moon is cleansed of the bad ones 
or there were a strong fortune with the Moon, or she were joined to it150 
from a trine or sextile aspect. 
(§69a) But pains which are in the eyes, like an inflammation and white- 
ness151 and the rest of the infirmities which are cured by iron, let this be in 
the increase of the Moon's light and her number, according to what I told 
you [above], before this heading. (§69b) And let [the Moon] be cleansed of 
Mars in the curing of the eye in particular, because if he aspected, let him be 
held back152 in this. But if Saturn aspected then, if the Moon were increased 
in number and light in the beginning of [the Lunar] month, it impedes less. 
(§69c) If however she were remote from the prevention,153 make the Moon 
aspect Mars from a trine aspect, and let her be joined to a fortune. And do 
not give strength to Mars in any curing of the eyes, because the sages agree 
147 The ninth does not appear in the Arabic. 
148 Following Crofts, for "beware lest the Moon and the Ascendant be in earthy signs and 
in Gemini." 
149 Cf. Carmen V.39.9. 
150 I believe this means "the benefic." 
151 Phlegmon et albedo. Crofts reads, "tumours and leucoma." 
152 Abstineatur. That is, do not let the doctor perform the procedure. Crofts reads, 
"...[Mars] will become more vehement in this." 
153 That is, after the Full Moon has passed. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 130 =====
Sahl bin Bishr: OnEleciions 115 
concerning the impediment of Mars in the head. (§69d) And they even 
said;154 everything which is cured with iron, look at its sovereignty in terms 
of the body,155 and you should not put the Moon nor the Ascendant in this 
sign, nor should you touch anything with iron if the Moon were in a com- 
mon sign nor in a movable one. 
[Removing hair] 
(§70a) If you wished to shave hairs with nurah156 (this is to remove hair 
with a certain kind of remedy), and so on, let this be when the Moon is in 
feminine signs, defective in light (§7Ob) Which if you were unable to do this, 
you should not put her in hairy signs (as Aries is, and Leo, and the rest of the 
bestial signs), and let the lord of the Ascendant be descending from the 
Midheaven to the stake of the earth.157 
[Buying slaves] 
(§71a) And158 if you wished to make a purchase of slaves, beware lest the 
Moon be joined to bad ones, or that there be a bad one below the earth, nor 
let the Moon be in a movable sign; (§7lb) because it signifies that the slave 
will be unfaithful to [his] master, and he will not be stable in one condition; 
or he will be fleeing if the Moon were separated from bad ones (except for 
Libra, which is more useful for this). (§72) But in fixed signs he will be en- 
during and supportive, and honoring his own master—except for Scorpio, 
because then he will be a whisperer,159 and an accuser, and weak in words; 
and in Leo he will be desiring,140 and on account of the gluttony of his belly 
a pain of the belly will happen to him; and he will be a robber. (§73) And let 
the Moon be in common signs, because this will be praiseworthy (except for 
Pisces, because he will consider betrayal in his own mind, and unfaithfulness 
toward his own masters, and he will be absent from them). And fear the con- 
154 Cf. Caraww V.39.8-9. 
155 That is, see which sign rules the afflicted part of the body. 
154 A depilatory paste (Lat. annora). 
157 That is, the IC. 
158 For this paragraph, cf. Carmen V.l 1. 
159 Reading susurrator for susurro. 
140 Or, ambitious. Crofts reads "greedy." 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 131 =====
116 Choices & Incefiions III; Complete Elechons 
junction of the Moon with the bad ones, because if she were joined with bad 
ones, it signifies that the slave will be sold. 
(§74) And if you wished to [gain something from slaves],161 beware of the 
presence of the Moon in the twelve signs,162 just as it is in the fifth book of 
Dorotheus. 
[Freeing slaves] 
(§75a) And if you wished to render a slave free (a freedman), let this be 
when the Moon is cleansed of defects, increased in light and number, and 
joined to the fortunes. (§75b) And let the fortune itself be eastern, in- 
creased:163 because if it were western [and] increased, he will find good but 
pains will happen to him, and he will not cease to have the defect144 until he 
dies. (§7 5c) But in the increase of the Moon's light, he will be sound in body; 
and in the increase of number, it will signify the discovery of assets. (§76a) 
And let the Sun and the sign of the Midheaven165 be cleansed of the bad 
ones: because if they were impeded, the master will find impediment accord- 
ing to the nature of the sign. (§76b) And let the hour of liberation be when 
the luminaries aspect each other from a trine or sextile aspect, so that there 
will be concord and esteem between the slave and master, and he will find 
good from him: (§77a) for the square aspect is the middle, and the aspect of 
the opposition signifies that the slave will contend with his master. (§77b) 
And he who made a slave a freedman when the Moon was impeded, slavery 
will be better for him than freedom: therefore put the Moon in fixed signs.166 
161 Reading based on Crofts, for the Latin "make a slave free." The Ar. says "if you want 
to gain anything from slaves from the presence of the Moon in the twelve signs, it is in the 
fifth book of Dorotheus." This is a reference back to Carmen V.ll, which speaks about 
the individual signs in purchasing a slave. 
162 Reading with Crofts for the Latin "twelfth sign." 
163 Perhaps increasing in latitude, as with §§51ff (according to al-Rijal V1I.25). 
164 Deficere. This verb generally means to be lacking, to fail, to run short, to be weak. 
165 Crofts reads, "the sign in mid-heaven" (emphasis mine). This must mean the sign on 
which the degree of the Midheaven falls, since that sign will be crossing the meridian. 
166 This "therefore"(«)go) is misplaced, since the Moon's being unimpeded does not entail 
that she be in fixed signs. In the Arabic these are two separate statements: slavery is better 
for someone if the Moon is impeded, and one should put the Moon in fixed signs. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 132 =====
Sahl bin Bishr.- On Elections 117 
(§78a) The seventh sign and whatever is in it in terms of elections 
[Marriage]167 
If you wanted the election of a marriage, beware lest the Moon be in the 
twelfth, and beware lest she be in signs which are not useful for this (which 
are Aries, Cancer, Capricorn, Aquarius). (§78b) And beware of the signs in 
which the bad ones and the Tail were, if you wished to be engaged to a 
woman. And let this be when the Moon is joined to fortunes and she is in a 
movable sign—and better than all of them together is the sign of Libra. 
(§79a) And beware, in getting engaged, lest the Moon be in a fixed sign. 
(§79b) But1*8 in the [sexual] conjoining (that is, when someone goes in to 
his wife in order to use her), beware lest she be in a movable sign or in a 
common one: but let this be when the Moon is in a fixed sign:1*9 (§79c) and 
better than the rest are Leo and Taurus (but Scorpio and Aquarius are not 
useful for the woman). (§80a) And the middle of Taurus is better [than] its 
beginning and end; but the first half of Gemini is worse, and the end is 
good; also, Aries and Cancer are bad, but Leo is praiseworthy (except that 
each of them will not cease to destroy the assets of his partner). (§80b) And 
Virgo is useful for a woman who already had been married, but not for a 
virgin; Libra, too, is bad; but the beginning of Scorpio is useful, and its end 
bad, because it signifies that their partnership will not be prolonged. (§80c) 
Also, Sagittarius is bad, and likewise the beginning of Capricorn (its middle 
and end is good); Aquarius too is bad, and likewise Pisces. 
(§81 a) And170 there is no usefulness in marriage if Venus aspected the bad 
ones. And let this be when Venus is in the houses of the fortunes and their 
bounds, joined to the lord of her own house. (§81 b) If however the lord of 
her house were a bad one, let her be separated from it, and let Jupiter be ele- 
vated over171 her, or Venus be joined to him from a trine aspect; (§81 c) and 
let the Moon and Jupiter and Venus be aspecting each other by a trine or 
sextile aspect, and the better of these is the trine aspect (and especially the 
167 This election in Sahl seems to be a jumble of material on engagement, having sex, and 
marriage; it is not always clear to me which of these topics Sahl is describing in a given 
sentence, or why he deals with them in the (uncertain) order he does. 
168 See Carmen V. 16.8-20. 
169 Undoubtedly so the sexual intercourse will last a long time. 
170 Cf. Carmen V. 16.21 -24, and perhaps V.16.5. 
171 That is, overcoming or in the tenth sign from her position (see Carmen V.16.22). 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 133 =====
118 Choices Inceptions III: Complete Elections 
triplicity of water). (§81d) And172 let the Moon be increased in light and 
number, free from the bad ones, and let Venus always be in her own house or 
exaltation, or triplicity, or her own joy, or in the conjunction of Jupiter or 
Mercury, and Mercury made fortunate and strong. 
(§82a) Likewise,173 make the Sun fit just as I have told you before, because 
from the Sun and the Ascendant is known the being of the man;174 and from 
Venus and the Moon and the seventh sign is known the being of the woman. 
(§82b) Therefore, beware of the aspect of the bad ones to them from the 
conjunction or the square aspect or the opposition. 
(§83a) And175 if it were a woman [getting] married, let the Moon be in 
common signs and the work be according to what I have told you before. 
And let the Ascendant at the hour of the marriage174 be of the signs which I 
told you before, so that the Moon would be in them. (§83b) And you should 
not put any of the bad ones in the Ascendant, nor should one aspect it from 
enmity; and let one of the fortunes be in the Midheaven.177 
(§84) And Dorotheus said,178 "Because then a child will be granted to 
them in that same year in which they are joined; which if [a watery sign]179 
were in the degree of the Midheaven, the woman will become pregnant in 
the first conjoining." 
[Going to war] 
(§85) The knowledge of the hours of going out to war.180 It is necessary 
that you should make the Ascendant one of the houses of the higher planets, 
of which the stronger is the house of Mars, if he were in a sextile or trine 
aspect of the Ascendant. (§86a) And let the lord of the Ascendant be in the 
172Cf. perhaps CamenV. 16. 36-37. 
173 Cf. Carmen V. 16. 1-4. 
174 Crofts says "child," indicating the man whose nativity it is. Cf. Carmen V.16.1. 
175 For this paragraph, cf. Carmen V.16.3. 
174 Lat. coniugii. Crofts says "consummation," i.e., the first sexual intercourse after the 
marriage. Coniugium can have this connotation. 
177 That is, in the Midheaven of each nativity: this is a kind of synastry consideration, not 
an election. See the following footnote. 
178 This must refer to Carmen V.16.25-26. Here Carmen makes two statements, both in a 
synastry context: (a) if a benefic is in the Midheaven of each of the nativities of the man 
and woman, then they will conceive in the year of their first sexual intercourse; (b) if the 
tenth domicile of each is a fertile (watery) sign, they will conceive at their first sexual in- 
tercourse. Al-Rijal VII.54 has the longer and more correct version. 
179 Following Crofts. 
iso por this topic, cf. Sahl in Judges §§7.160 and 7.167. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 134 =====
Sahl bin Bishrj On Elections 119 
Ascendant or in the eleventh or the tenth;181 and beware of the fourth or the 
seventh and the eighth. And it should not be burned up nor cadent, nor 
joined to a cadent planet who does not receive it.182 (§86b) And make the 
lord of the seventh be joined to the lord of the Ascendant, or put it in the 
Ascendant or in the second. (§87a) If you wished that they be joined, [then] 
put Mars183 in the stakes, so that they would encounter each other and war 
will fall between them. And join a fortune having a role in the Ascendant, to 
Mars, so that it might bar him from the Ascendant. (§87b) And you should 
not go to war unless Mars is in an aspect of friendship to the lord of the 
Ascendant, like if he himself is the lord of the Ascendant184 and he is strong 
and in a good place, and not impeded, nor burnt up, and he is in signs of 
straight ascension. (§87c) And beware that you do not put him [anywhere] 
except in the domain185 of the Ascendant, so that his help will be toward him 
whom you are sending to war and him who sends the soldiers to war, be- 
cause they will be saved,186 by the command of God. (§88a) Even adapt the 
second and its lord for the soldiers187 of the one initiating [the conflict], and 
the eighth and its lord for the soldiers of the enemy; and you should not put 
the lord of the eighth in the seventh, nor in the eighth, but put the lord of 
the eighth in the second. 
181 The Arabic omits "the tenth." 
182 Crofts makes it sound as though one should avoid the fourth, seventh, and eighth only 
if the lord of the Ascendant is in one of these bad conditions. But this is against normal 
astrological practices and the logic of passages like §88a below. 
183 Reading with the Ar. The Latin was garbled, putting Mars with the lord of the seventh 
as part of the previous sentence, and making the lords of the seventh and the Ascendant 
be conjoined in an angle, in this sentence. Al-Rijal VII.55 confirms this reading. 
184 Crofts reads, "Only go to war when Mars is in command in his course, that he can be 
the lord of the Ascendant," with the rest of the conditions following. (Still, it is a good 
idea for Mars to be in a good aspect to the lord of the Ascendant.) Al-Tmranl II. 1.8 is 
closer to the Latin Sahl here, while al-Rijal VII.55 matches Crofts. 
185 Ar. hayyiz. That is. Mars shouldht in the domain of the Ascendant. This word is used in 
several ways in medieval astrology. In Arabic it is sometimes a synonym for "sect," but in 
other cases it refers to a specific sect-related rejoicing condition (ITA III.2): a diurnal 
planet above the earth by day or below it by night, and in a masculine sign (or a nocturnal 
planet below the earth by day or above it by night, and in a feminine sign). However, this 
use of hayyiz may simply mean that Mars should be in the eastern side or hemisphere of 
the chart: note the following statements about Mars helping out the one going to war 
(which is represented by the Ascendant), and al-Rijal, who refers to the "side" (pars) of the 
Ascendant. 
186 Reading with Crofts for "freed." 
187 That is, the allies of the one undertaking the action (and the eighth for the opponent's 
allies). See Crofts, "supporters." 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 135 =====
120 Choices Inceptions III: Complete Elections 
(§88b) And put the Lot of Fortune and its lord in the Ascendant or in the 
second, and you should not put them in the eighth nor in the seventh. (§88c) 
And you should not make the Ascendant and the lord of its house impeded, 
if you began a matter; likewise the dignity of the twelfth-part of the 
Moon.188 (§89a) Because it is necessary in the matter of war to make the stars 
of war fit (that is, Mars and Mercury), also the Moon and the lord of her 
house. Therefore, look, in the fitness of these things, and you should not be 
neglectful in this (nor should you hand it over to forgetfulness). 
(§90a) And know that if you brought both armies forth189 for war wisely, 
just as I have said above, he will gain the victory who, of them, was born at 
night and in whose nativity Mars had a role:190 because Mars is the master of 
wars, and wars are committed to him. (§90b) And perhaps they will enter into 
an agreement or will give up the war (that is, if the place of their departure 
to war were good).191 
[Military actions: buying arms, destroying forts and arms, and ending the war] 
(§91) And if you wished to buy arms and the instruments of war, let this 
be when Mars is in his own house or in the exaltation or his own triplicity, at 
the end of the [Lunar] month: because the sages were careful lest the Moon 
be with Mars at the beginning of the [Lunar] month (and at its end, it is 
more useful).192 
(§92) And if you wished to overwhelm fortresses,193 let the undertaking 
of this work be when the Moon is impeded, without strength, 
188 This may mean that the sign of the Moon's twelfth-part, and its lord, should be in a 
good condition and not have malefics in it. 
189 Produxeris. 
190 The Latin is more specific than the Arabic, which reads "who had Mars in his nativity." 
Al-Rijal VII.55 describes one who was born at night or who had Mars "in a better place" 
in his nativity. A nocturnal nativity with a powerful Mars is obviously chosen because 
Mars belongs to the nocturnal sect and will therefore be of the sect in power. Sahl must 
be recommending that we look to other favorable sect conditions and rulerships and 
placements: like Scorpio rising and Mars in the eleventh (and in a masculine sign), in a 
nocturnal chart. 
191 Crofts reads, "if the position of the departure to battle of both of them works favora- 
bly." Per al-Rijal's reading (VII.55), this refers to having a favorable chart on each side of 
the conflict. 
192 Sahl is implying that the Moon should be joined to Mars, which is precisely what al- 
Rijal VI1.56 says (though he differs from Sahl in certain respects). 
193 Crofts reads, "demolish forts," but the idea is the same. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 136 =====
Sahl bin Bishr: On Elections 121 
(§93) And if you wished to destroy some instrument of war,194 begin this 
when Mercury is impeded and without strength. 
(§94) And if you wished to spoil the fighting,195 let this be when Mars is 
impeded and without strength. 
[Destroying land, idols, and evilplaces] 
(§95) And19* if you wished to destroy land, begin when the Moon is made 
unfortunate, not having strength. 
(§96) And if you wished to destroy a place of idols and the place in which 
it is prayed to a devil and not to God, begin this when Venus is impeded and 
without strength. 
(§97a) The eighth sign and whatever is in it in terms of elections 
If197 some man wished to make a will, he should not begin this when the 
Ascendant and the sign of the Moon are movable, because this would signi- 
fy198 that the will's recommendation199 will be changed. (§97b) But let it be 
committed [to writing] when the Moon is defective in number and increased 
in light, and the Moon should not be joined to a planet under the rays (be- 
cause this signifies the quickness of death). (§98) And more cunning200 than 
this [is if] the Moon were with Mars or in his square, or in his opposite, or 
Mars were in the Ascendant or aspecting it from enmity, because this signi- 
fies that the recommendation will not be changed, and the infirm person will 
die from the same infirmity, and the recommendation will not be perfected 
after his death [or it will be stolen].201 (§99) And if Saturn were [positioned] 
likewise from the Moon and the Ascendant [as Mars was], the life of the man 
will be prolonged, and the recommendation will be perfected after him, and 
194 That is, instruments belonging to the enemy. 
195 Reading with Crofts for "destroy the opposition of the war." 
194 Cf. Carmen V.7.1, and al-'Imrani II.1.5. 
197 Cf. Carmen V.42.1-7. 
198 Reading signifuet for Hgnificat. 
199 Lat. commndatio, referring to something entrusted to someone else to carry out. This 
election is concerned with whether the decedent's wishes will be carried out. 
200 Caltidius. But Crofts reads "worse," which is also suggested by al-Rijal VII.67. The 
Latin might be a misread for certius, "more certainly so." 
201 Adding missing phrase from Crofts. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 137 =====
122 Choices & Incefhons III: Complete Elections 
it will not be changed in his life, nor after his death. (§100) And if Venus and 
Jupiter were in a like manner from the Moon and the Ascendant, the owner 
of the recommendation will live longer and change the testament.202 
(§101) The ninth sign and whatever is in it in terms of elections 
[Foreign travel in general] 
You203 should not neglect to direct the foreign travels of men based upon 
their nativities (namely, upon the Ascendant204 of every nativity and its 
stakes). (§102a) And let the Moon be in its Ascendant or in its Midheaven; 
and adapt the lord of the matter which you seek, and adapt the lord of the 
year, and the lord of the Ascendant of the root and of the year.205 (§102b) 
Which if you did not know what I said,206 look (for him who came to you) 
from the lord of the matter which is sought, to see where its place is from 
the lord of the Ascendant.207 (§103a) After this, indicate to him the hour 
suitable to his nativity or question (that is, you should not make the Ascend- 
ant of the question and its lord cadent from the Ascendant of his departure). 
(§103b) And let the Ascendant of the departure be the tenth [sign] of the 
Ascendant of the question or nativity, if he sought a kingdom; and if he 
sought a business deal, the eleventh [sign] from the Ascendant of the ques- 
tion; and likewise in every matter which you sought, make that sign the 
Ascendant for him (§104a) And let the Moon be in the stakes and in the 
succeedents of the stakes, if she were free from the bad ones; and let her be 
aspecting the Ascendant. But if she were impeded, make her be cadent from 
the Ascendant. (§104b) And let the lord of the Ascendant and the lord of 
the house of the Moon be in stakes, and let the Moon aspect the lord of her 
own house. (§105a) And beware lest you put the Moon with the bad ones, or 
202 Reading with Crofts (and al-Rijal VII.67) for the garbled and incorrect Latin, "will end 
his life and the recommendation will follow." 
203 Cf. Carmen V.21 -22, though there are not a lot of clear parallels here. 
204 Reading with Crofts, for ascensiones ("ascensions"). 
205 So we must adapt: (a) the lord of the matter in the election chart; (b) the profected lord 
of the year of the nativity; (c) the lord of the natal Ascendant; (d) the lord of the Ascend- 
ant in the solar revolution. 
204 E.g., if the traveler did not know his own nativity, so that one could not adapt its fea- 
tures or that of the solar revolution. 
207 That is, simply look at the lord of the matter and the lord of the Ascendant in the elec- 
tion chart itself. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 138 =====
Sahl bin Bishii- On Elections 123 
in their aspect from the square aspect or the opposition, because the aspect 
of the bad ones to the Ascendant is easier than their aspect to the 
Moon208— (§105b) and this especially in foreign travel, because her conjunc- 
tion with Mars in the beginning of the [Lunar] month signifies robbers, or a 
king,209 or fire. (§106) And always beware lest you put the Moon in the 
fourth, but put her in the fifth (if she were made fortunate in this place, 
there will be less absence in the foreign travel, and more profit in his matters, 
and more success in it, and also less loosening21* of his body, and easier for 
his journey, and more for the safety of him who was with him). (§107) Even 
the presence of the Moon in the Ascendant in his entrance and departure is 
horrible, because infirmity will be feared for the one on foreign travel in his 
journey, or heavy labor in his body. 
Journeys to particular people] 
(§108a) If however it was a journey to the king, make the Moon be joined 
to the Sun or to the lord of the Midheaven from a trine or sextile aspect, and 
let the Sun be in a good place in the Ascendant, or in the eleventh or in the 
tenth; (§108b) because if he were cadent, he will not find good from him;211 
and if he were in the ninth, or in the third and the fifth, it signifies labor and 
middling success. Likewise the western stake and the fourth [stake] signify a 
scarcity of good, with labor and slowness. (§109) And if you sought nobles 
and judges, or the leaders of sects (that is, bishops and the rest such), let 
there be a conjunction of the Moon with Jupiter from the stakes, or in a 
good place from the Ascendant. (§110) But if your departure were to the 
leaders of batdes, let there be a conjunction of the Moon with Mars from a 
trine or sextile aspect, and beware of his conjunction and the stakes;212 and 
let Mars be in the ones following the stakes.213 (§111) And if your departure 
were to those who are of mature age, or to ignoble people, let her conjunc- 
208 This is an interesting claim I have not read elsewhere. 
209 Begem, but this should read "tyrant" with Crofts, which makes more sense. 
210 Crofts reads, "strain." The Latin idea seems to be that his body will not fall apart under 
the strain of travel. 
211 The Latin reads as though this means, "the traveler will not find good from the king." 
But Crofts reads as though the asttvloger will find no good in the Sun. In practice it will not 
make a difference. 
212 This probably means Mars should not be in the whole-sign angles of the Moon. 
213 This suggests the angles of the Ascendant. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 139 =====
124 Choices & Inceptions HI: Complete Elections 
tion be with Saturn from friendship, and let Saturn be in the succeedents of 
the stakes. (§112) But if your departure were to women, join the Moon to 
Venus and let Venus be in a masculine sign; and if you could [make it] so that 
she is in the places which I told you before for a parmership, do so. (§113a) 
And if your departure were to writers and merchants and the wise, let the 
conjunction be with Mercury. And beware lest Mercury be then under the 
rays, or retrograde, or the bad ones aspect him: (§113b) because214 as often as 
the star to whom the Moon is joined, or a planet which is in conjunction 
with215 the Ascendant, or the lord of the seventh were slow or impeded, it 
signifies complications and duress in those ways. 
[Sea travel] 
(§114a) If216 however it were a foreign journey by water, let the Moon be 
in signs of water, and beware of the conjunction of the Moon with Saturn 
from a stake in foreign journeys of water. And beware of [the malignity of] 
Saturn, so that he is not in a watery sign, and lest he be fixed in the Ascend- 
ant217 of the departure, or with the Moon. (§114b) Which if it would not 
come about but that it were so, let the Moon be joined to him with a strong 
fortune (or in its218 aspect) from a trine or sextile aspect, or from a stake, so 
that it would take away the malignity of Saturn due to shipwreck or impedi- 
ment or a severe tempest. 
(§115a) For219 in sailing the sea you should not make the luminaries im- 
peded, because if they were adapted and safe from the bad ones, and if they 
were not220 made fortunate by the fortunes, they signify safety and prosperity. 
(§115b) But if they were impeded, the man will be dead or lost on his foreign 
journey. And you should not sail the sea when the Moon is between the old 
214 For the rest of this sentence, cf. Carmen V.21.7. Reading some of the clauses with the 
Ar. and al-Rijal VII.70, as they are clearer. 
215 Reading with the Ar., for "in the opposite of." 
216 For this paragraph, cf. Carmen V.25.16-18, and 39. 
217 Crofts reads, "with command over the Ascendant of the departure or the Moon," 
which probably means being the lord of the Ascendant or the lord of the Moon's domi- 
cile. 
218 This probably means "the benefic's aspect." 
219 For this sentence and the next, cf. Carmen V.25.34. 
220 This seems counterintuitive: one would expect things to be better if they were made 
fortunate. But Carmen V.25.34 does say that the luminaries are free of both the infortunes 
and the fortunes. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 140 =====
SAHL BIN BISHR: ON ELECTIONS 125 
Moon and the new,221 because this is horrible. (§115c) If222 however he sailed 
the sea on account of a business matter, adapt Mercury and the Moon espe- 
cially, and let it223 be aspecting Jupiter from Cancer or Pisces: (§115d) for 
Scorpio is horrible in sailing the sea on account of the place of Mars and his 
enmity against those sailing the sea. (§115e) And fear the bounds of the bad 
ones in sailing the sea—wherefore in sailing the coast [or traveling over 
mountains]224 there is less impediment than in sailing the sea. 
[Land versus sea travel] 
(§116) And225 if it were a foreign journey by land, the Moon should not 
be in watery signs, [but should be] cleansed of the bad ones. And beware of 
the aspect of Mars in a foreign journey on the land,226 just as I have warned 
you to beware of Saturn when sailing the sea. And beware lest the foreign 
journey be of any kind when the Moon is in Scorpio. (§117a) And know that 
the healthiest [signs] are the earthy signs for him who wished to ride by land, 
and the watery ones for him who wished to sail in the water of the sea. And 
Saturn is of greater impediment in the sea, and more strongly so if he did 
not aspect Jupiter. (§117b) And beware, in a foreign journey on land and by 
sea, if the Moon is in the last image227 of the sign of Libra. (Know all of 
this.) 
221 In interlunio. Crofts reads, "when the Moon is absent." I take this to mean the period 
when the Moon is under the rays of the Sun. 
222 For this sentence, cf. perhaps Carmen V.25.33. 
223 Mercury or the Moon. This sentence in Crofts says we are to adapt Mercury or the 
Moon, not and the Moon. 
224 Filling in missing phrase, with Crofts. 
225 For this paragraph and the next, cf. Carmen V.25.39, and 42-43. 
226 Reading with Crofts for "coast." 
227 Normally I would take this to mean "face" or "decan," but Crofts provides an argu- 
ment (based on Arabic usage, p. 184) that this means "paranatellonton," extra-zodiacal 
constellations rising at the same time. I am unsure about this. At any rate, the last portion 
of Libra is in the burnt path, so it would be bad no matter what the meaning of "image" is 
here. But see Carmen V.25.7. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 141 =====
126 Choices Ct Incephons III: Complete Elections 
[Entering a land or region] 
(§118) And228 know that it is necessary (should you wish to) to adapt the 
region into which you are entering, so that you adapt the second from the 
Ascendant while you enter any kind of region which you wanted to; and if 
you did this, you have already adapted the region. (§119a) And you ought to 
adapt the Ascendant, and its lord, and the Moon and the lord of the second, 
if you can; therefore make it be a fortune and let it be above the earth in the 
ninth or in the tenth or in the eleventh; (§119b) and never should you put it 
below the earth (namely in the fourth or fifth or sixth), because this is horri- 
ble in a foreign journey and in a work which you seek in that region; and let it 
be above the earth, whether it were a fortune or a bad one. (§120a) And 
strive so that the lord of the house of the Moon is with the lord of the se- 
cond above the earth, and you should not put him under the earth, because 
this is not praiseworthy (unless that which you seek in that region is a matter 
which you wish to conceal, so that it does not appear until it is perfected). 
(§120b) And let the Moon then229 be between 12° and 15° from the Sun— 
and better yet if the Moon, when she goes out from under the rays up to 3°, 
is made fortunate. For this is better and more praiseworthy than everything 
which you need in the concealment.230 (§121) And if you sought a kingdom 
in that region, make the Midheaven and its lord fit, with the second from the 
Ascendant, and the Moon. 
[The Moon in the signs for travel] 
(§122a) After this,231 look, in foreign travels (according to what Dorotheus 
said for foreign travels by water), at the place of the Moon in the signs. 
Which, if she were in the first face of Aries and the planets aspected (or they 
did not aspect), it signifies the ease of his matter; (§122b) and if she were in 
Taurus, the impediment of Mars will be less for her, but if however Satum 
aspected, it will impede [the client] and will make a shipwreck for him;232 and 
228 Cf. Carmen V.22.7-13, and 2; also Sahl in Judges §9.12 {On Quest. §9.2). In the Latin of 
'Umar's book on nativities (see PN2 App. A), this is attributed to Masha'allah and is a 
question, not an election. 
229 That is, if you do want the matter to be concealed. 
230 In other words, this is the best thing to do in matters of concealment. 
231 Cf. Carmen V.25.1-13, and al-Rijal VII.74.1. 
232 Carmen and al-Rijal do not distinguish the malefics here, simply saying that there will be 
losses if they aspect the Moon in Taums. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 142 =====
SsiHL BIN BlSHR.- ONELECIJONS 127 
in the second face of Gemini it signifies slowness, [but] after this safety; but 
in Cancer, safety from every impediment; (§122c) but in Leo, say impedi- 
ment—and more strongly so if a bad one aspected; and in Virgo, say 
prosperity and slowness, and turning back;233 and in Libra, if she had crossed 
ten degrees, you should not go on a foreign journey by land nor by sea;234 
and in Scorpio, say sorrow; (§122d) and in Sagittarius, say before the journey 
is perfected he will turn back;235 and in the beginning of Capricorn a little bit 
of good; and in Aquarius, say slowness and safety; and in Pisces say impedi- 
ment and difficulty. (§122e) And if a bad one aspected, the detriment will 
increase; but if a fortune aspected, the impediment will be made better and 
the good will be strengthened. (Know this.) 
(§123a) The tenth sign and whatever is in it in terms of elections 
[Traveling with a king or prince] 
If you wished to set out with a king or prince to a region over which he 
was already in charge, let this be when Jupiter is in the Ascendant or in the 
seventh,236 because this signifies that he who goes will find good and joy in 
that journey, and he will see what pleases him. (§123b) And beware lest you 
put Jupiter in the fourth, because this is horrible; and let the Moon and Ve- 
nus testify to him from one of the stakes. And beware lest Saturn and 
Mars237 be in the Ascendant or in one of the stakes. (§123c) And you should 
not put the Moon under the rays; and beware lest she be with the Tail or with 
the bad ones, because there is no good in this: for if he went on a foreign 
journey, he will not return; and if he became infirm, he will die; and if he 
went off to war, he will be killed or overcome. 
233 Crofts reads, "safety tea slow return" (emphasis mine). 
234 But see Carmen V,25.7. 
235 Crofts reads (with express puzzlement), "say that he will remove its colours," Carmen 
says, "calamities and misfortune from the waves will reach it" {Carmen V.25.9-10), Again, 
Carmen is speaking about journeys by sea. 
236 The Latin adds, "or in the ninth." 
237 Following the Arabic by omitting Venus. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 143 =====
128 Choices & Incefiions III; Complete Elections 
[Attaining a dignity] 
(§124) And if you wished to be raised up and moved to a kingdom,238 let 
this be with the ascension of Leo,239 and let the Sun be in Taurus in the 
Midheaven and the Moon in the Ascendant, joined to fortunes or to the lord 
of the Midheaven. 
[Accession to the throne] 
(§125a) And if you wished to introduce a king into the seat of his empire, 
let the Ascendant be a fixed sign, and likewise the fourth,240 (§125b) and let 
the lord of the Midheaven be free from the bad ones, and the lord of the 
Ascendant in a good place, received, and the lord of the tenth should not 
aspect the eleventh from enmity. (§126a) And let the Moon be aspecting the 
lord of her own house from friendship; also the lord of the fourth sign 
should aspect the fortunes. (§126b) If however you were unable to do it 
based on what I have told you before, let the Moon be received and the lord 
of the fourth in a strong place, aspecting the fortunes. (§126c) Which if you 
could not do this, make it241 be cadent from the Ascendant and its aspect, 
and make the fortunes be aspecting the fourth sign and the Midheaven. 
[Particular dignities] 
(§127) And if you wished to elect the hour so that you would be set over 
the [tax] revenues,242 let the Moon be joined to Saturn out of friendship, at 
the beginning of the [Lunar] month, and let her be in the house of Saturn, 
and the fortunes aspecting her: because this signifies stability (and that the 
work will be stable); and let the Midheaven be a fixed sign, so that it will be 
one work. 
238 Crofts reads, "enhance your reputation to the ruler." The Latin clearly assumes that the 
increased reputation has an official post as its goal 
239 That is, Leo should be the ascending sign. 
240 This must refer to the degree of the IC, which should be on the fourth sign, a fixed 
one. 
241 This seems to mean the lord of the fourth. 
242 Crofts reads, "to supervise levying taxes." 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 144 =====
SAHL BIN BlSHR: ON ELECTIONS 129 
(§128a) And if you wished to secure [military] standards,243 let the Moon 
be in the houses of Mars, made fortunate, and let her be aspecting Mars 
from esteem, with the fortunes, at the end of the [Lunar] month, [with her] 
joined to them. (§128b) And the confirmation of those standards which are 
below the king244 will be more worthy than this if the Moon is cleansed [of 
the bad ones] and she is not in the houses of the bad ones, nor in Cancer, 
(§128c) unless it is the standard of the master of the war: and let this be in 
the houses of Mars (and the better and more useful of them is Scorpio, on 
account of the strength of Mars, and his stability in it). 
[Making an enemy of the king/ 
(§129a) And if you wished to make an enemy of the king, and you your- 
self were the one being inimical, let this be when the Moon is increased in 
light, and let the Moon and the Ascendant be cleansed of the bad ones, 
(§129b) and let the lord of the Ascendant be in an optimal place from the 
Ascendant, in one of its own dignities; direct and safe from the bad ones 
(whether it was a fortune or a bad one). (§129c) And let the lord of the sev- 
enth be in a bad place from the Ascendant, not aspecting a fortune nor the 
luminaries. 
[Approaching an inimical king] 
(§130) But if he were angry with you, you should not appear to him un- 
less the Moon is defective in light, and let [the Ascendant and its lord, and 
the Moon, be impeded; and let]245 the lord of the seventh be made fortunate 
in a good place from the Ascendant, so that it is stronger for your own mat- 
ters. 
243 These are the flags and standards used on the battlefield to make announcements and 
give commands. 
244 That is, of those who are not of royal status. 
245 Adding based on Crofts. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 145 =====
130 Choices <& Inceptions III: Complete Elechons 
(§131a) The eleventh sign and whatever is in it in terms of elections 
[Makingfriendships] 
If you wished to make a friendship with someone, let the Moon be 
cleansed of the stakes of the bad ones, and let the lord of the eleventh be 
aspecting the Ascendant from friendship. (§131b) And244 make the Moon be 
joined to the essence of the planet which you seek: like Venus for women, 
and Mercury for writers, and all the circles according to what that brings.247 
[Seeking something hopedfor] 
(§132a) And248 if you wished to seek some thing from any man, let the 
lord of the Ascendant be aspecting the Ascendant from friendship, and let 
the Ascendant be a fixed sign or a common one; and let the Moon be in [the 
Ascendant],249 or in its triplicity250 or square aspect; (§132b) and beware of 
the opposition, nor let [the Moon] be joined to bad ones, or [beware] lest she 
is not aspecting the lord of her own house. If however the Moon did not 
aspect the lord of her own house, the matter will not be perfected. (§132c) 
Therefore, seek things always when the Moon is increased in light and num- 
ber, and the lord of the Ascendant direct, and the Moon joined to fortunes; 
if however the fortune were direct and the Moon joined to increased for- 
tunes, it will be increased. (§133) And beware lest Mercury be in a bad 
condition: because if he were impeded and he were received, it signifies in- 
convenience and duress, and a second return in the seeking.251 
246 According to Crofts (p. 187), this sentence belongs in the next paragraph, on seeking 
things from people. Indeed, Carmen V.14 (on seeking things from people) does begin with 
statements about the Moon and then combines her with different planets for different 
types of people. 
247 Reading with Crofts for "will come for this." Sahl means we should pick the natural 
significator of the type of person that pertains. 
248 For this election, cf. Carmen V.14, which however does not match it closely. 
249 Following Crofts, instead of having the lord of the Ascendant be in the Ascendant— 
which would have contradicted the previous instruction. 
250 I.e., in a whole-sign trine. 
251 This last clause seems to be rendering the Arabic, "it indicates displeasure in the re- 
quest and a mean refusal." The Latin (and not the Arabic) seems to mean that he will be 
rebuffed once and have to try again. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 146 =====
Sahl bin Bishil- On Eleciions 131 
(§134) And make the Moon be joined to the planet to which your matter 
pertains: like the Sun for a king and Mars for generals and those making war 
(likewise regarding the remaining lords of the circles). 
(§135) The twelfth sign and whatever is in it in terms of elections 
[Buying animals] 
IP52 you wished to buy a beast, let this be when the Moon is joined to for- 
tunes and they are direct and eastern, ascending; and beware the conjunction 
of the bad ones, because then it is to be feared concerning the beast. (§136a) 
And if it were tamed and already ridden, buy it when the Ascendant is a 
common sign and the Moon in a fixed sign (except for Aquarius and Scor- 
pio). (§136b) And let the one to whom she is joined, be direct [and] 
ascending, so that the beast might increase in price and body: because if it 
were retrograde ascending, there will be diminishment in the body of the 
beast but the price will be increased; and if it were direct descending, it will 
be increased in body and the price will not be appropriate for it. (§137) But if 
the beast were untamed, that is, not ridden, let the Ascendant be a common 
sign and the Moon in a movable sign, joined to a fortune; after this, do just 
as I told you before in the first heading.253 
[Hunting andfishing] 
(§138a) And if you wished to go out to hunt, go out under a common 
sign, and let the lord of the seventh be defective254 and descending, and let it 
be in the succeedents of the stakes: because if it were cadent, it signifies that 
the prey will escape after he caught it. (§138b) And let the Moon, in every 
departure to hunt, be separated from Mars, made fortunate in an optimal 
place from the Ascendant. And you should not go out to hunt if the Moon 
252 Carmen V. 12 is a short chapter on buying animals, but bears little resemblance to this. 
To my mind there is ambiguity in this election, because it recommends that the planet to 
which the Moon applies be ascending (probably in its epicycle or apogee), which increases 
the price. But the increase in price should benefit the seller, not the buyer. 
253 This must mean in the first sentence of this chapter, i.e., §135, using the same criteria 
of ascending, descending, etc. 
254 Crofts reads, "decreasing." 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 147 =====
132 Choices & Inceptions III: Compjcete Elections 
were at the end of the signs, nor void in course, nor in a movable sign. 
(§138c) And beware lest the lord of her own house does not aspect her: be- 
cause if it did aspect her, it will signify ease for him in the matter. 
(§139a) And make Mercury be cleansed of the bad ones in a hunt by wa- 
ter; if however you wanted a hunt in the mountains, let the Moon be in Aries 
and its triplicity; (§139b) if but it were a hunt for birds, let the Moon be in 
Gemini and its triplicity, joined to Mercury or separated from the same Mer- 
cury, [with] him descending: because this is better. 
(§140a) And if you wanted a hunt by sea, let this be when the Ascendant 
is a common sign, and its lord in a watery sign; and beware lest the Ascend- 
ant be a fiery sign And let the Moon be aspecting the lord of het own house. 
(§140b) And know that the impediment of the Moon with Mars in a hunt by 
sea will be worse and of more scarce profit: therefore beware of the imped- 
iment of Mars in a hunt by sea (and beware of the impediment of Saturn in 
a hunt by land). (§140c) Also, were you to make Venus and the Moon fit, and 
Mars did not impede them in a hunt by sea, the catch will be doubled (by its 
owner)255 and multiplied, and its owner will gain the greatest wealth, and the 
hunt will prosper by means of its owner: (§140d) therefore let the Moon be 
joined to Venus, and let Mercury be with her; and if however Mercury were 
impeded by Saturn, it will not impede this. And beware lest Mars be in a wa- 
tery sign and the Moon be joined to him, or Venus be joined to Mars. 
[Fleeing or performing concealed actions] 
(§141 a) If254 however you wanted to take flight or perform a concealed 
work, and [for] everyone who wished to flee or be hidden: let this be when 
the Moon is separated from the bad ones and joined to the fortunes. And let 
the Moon be joined to Saturn under the rays, and let her be joined to the 
fortunes at the time of her exiting from under the rays.257 (§141b) And the 
255 That is, the one undertaking the action. Arabic authors frequently speak of the client as 
the "master" or "owner" of the question or election. 
256 Cf. Carmen V.5.3-4. 
257 Crofts makes this last clause pertain to Saturn, not the Moon: "when he is joined to a 
benefic on emerging from the rays." But it seems to me that the statement applies better 
to the Moon. This was also mentioned before in §30a-b with specific reference to the 
Moon. 

===== PDF_PAGE_INDEX 148 =====
SAHL BIN BlSHR: ON ELECTIONS 133 
luminaries, if they were to arise258 over some matter, they will uncover it and 
make it appear: therefore beware of their aspects in a like way. 
[Pursuingfugtives] 
(§142) And259 if you sought someone fleeing, let this be when the Moon 
is joined to the bad ones or she is going out from under the rays: and in her 
going-out [from the rays] let her encounter a bad one from the square aspect 
or the opposition or conjunction;260 and you should never put the Moon nor 
the planetary receiver of the disposition261 in the fourth. 
(§143) On that which is not in the twelve signs in terms of elections 
And262 if you wished to write a letter, let this be when the Moon is joined 
with Mercury, cleansed of the bad ones; and let Mercury be strong and made 
fortunate, not retrograde, nor impeded, and let him and the Moon be 
cleansed of the bad ones. 
The Book of Elections of Sahl bin Bishr ends. 
258 Orta fuerint. See the version of this statement in al-Rijal VII.73. It must refer to the 
notion (in On Quest. §7.13 and Carmen V.35), that a luminary in or aspecting important 
places indicates the discovery of a thief or recovery of goods. 
259 Cf. Sahl in Judges §7.72 (OnQuest. §7.10). This is probably based on Masha'allah's trans- 
lation of Carmen, as both al-Khayyat and "Dorotheus" have similar passages (Judges §§7.77 
and 7.78, respectively). 
260 The Arabic omits the conjunction. 
261 That is, the planet to which she (or any other planet) applies. 
262 Cf. Carmen VAS. 